Last updated: 26 June 2018
Goal 7: Ensure access to affordable, reliable, sustainable and modern energy for all
Target 7.2: By 2030, increase substantially the share of renewable energy in the global energy mix
Indicator 7.2.1: Renewable energy share in the total final energy consumption
Institutional information
Organization(s):
International Energy Agency (IEA)
United Nations Statistics Division (UNSD)
United Nations' inter-agency Mechanism on Energy (UN Energy)
International Renewable Energy Agency (IRENA)
Concepts and definitions
Definition:
The renewable energy share in total final consumption is the percentage of final consumption of energy
that is derived from renewable resources.
Rationale:
The target “By 2030, increase substantially the share of renewable energy in the global energy mix”
impacts all three dimensions of sustainable development. Renewable energy technologies represent a
major element in strategies for greening economies everywhere in the world and for tackling the critical
global problem of climate change. A number of definitions of renewable energy exist; what they have in
common is highlighting as renewable all forms of energy that their consumption does not deplete their
availability in the future. These include solar, wind, ocean, hydropower, geothermal resources, and
bioenergy (in the case of bioenergy, which can be depleted, sources of bioenergy can be replaced within
a short to medium-term frame). Importantly, this indicator focuses on the amount of renewable energy
actually consumed rather than the capacity for renewable energy production, which cannot always be
fully utilized. By focusing on consumption by the end user, it avoids the distortions caused by the fact
that conventional energy sources are subject to significant energy losses along the production chain.
Concepts:
Renewable energy consumption includes consumption of energy derived from: hydro, solid biofuels,
wind, solar, liquid biofuels, biogas, geothermal, marine and waste. Total final energy consumption is
calculated from national balances and statistics as total final consumption minus non-energy use.
Comments with regard to specific renewable energy resources:
• Solar energy consumption includes solar PV and solar thermal
• Liquid biofuel energy consumption includes biogasoline, biodiesels and other liquid biofuels
• Solid biofuel consumption includes fuelwood, animal waste, vegetable waste, black liquor,
bagasse and charcoal 
Last updated: 26 June 2018
• Waste energy covers energy from renewable municipal waste
Comments and limitations:
• A limitation with existing renewable energy statistics is that they are not able to distinguish
whether renewable energy is being sustainably produced. For example, a substantial share of
today’s renewable energy consumption comes from the use of wood and charcoal by households
in the developing world, which sometimes may be associated with unsustainable forestry
practices. There are efforts underway to improve the ability to measure the sustainability of bioenergy,
although this remains a significant challenge.
• Off-grid renewables data is limited and not sufficiently captured in the energy statistics
• The method of allocation of renewable energy consumption from electricity and heat output
assumes that the share of transmission and distribution losses are the same between all
technologies. However, this is not always true because renewables are usually located in more
remote areas from consumption centers and may incur larger losses.
• Likewise, imports and exports of electricity and heat are assumed to follow the share of
renewability of electricity and heat generation, respectively. This is a simplification that in many
cases will not affect the indicator too much, but that might do so in some cases, for example,
when a country only generates electricity from fossil fuels but imports a great share of the
electricity it uses from a neighboring country’s hydroelectric power plant.
• Methodological challenges associated with defining and measuring renewable energy are more
fully described the Global Tracking Framework (IEA and World Bank, 2013) Chapter 4, Section 1,
page 194-200. Data for traditional use of solid biofuels are generally scares globally, and
developing capacity in tracking such energy use, including developing national level surveys, is
essential for sound global energy tracking.
Methodology
Computation Method:
This indicator is based on the development of comprehensive energy statistics across supply and demand
for all energy sources – statistics used to produce a national energy balance. Internationally agreed
methodologies for energy statistics are described in the “International Recommendations on Energy
Statistics” (IRES), adopted by the UN Statistical Commission, available at:
https://unstats.un.org/unsd/energy/ires/.
Once a national energy balance is developed, the indicator can be calculated by dividing consumption of
energy from all renewable sources by total final energy consumption. Renewable energy consumption is
derived from three tables of the IEA world energy statistics and balances: total final consumption,
electricity output and heat output. All volumes reported in the total final consumption table are taken as
reported. Since volumes for electricity and heat in the final consumption table are not broken down by
technology, electricity and heat output tables are used instead to break down final consumption of
electricity and heat by technology. The allocation by technology is done by deriving the share of
technology in electricity and heat output tables and multiplying that share by final energy consumption of
electricity and heat, respectively. For instance, if total final consumption table reports 150 TJ for biogas
energy, while total final consumption of electricity is 400 TJ and heat 100 TJ, and the share of biogas in
total electricity output is 10 percent and 5 percent in heat, the total reported number for biogas
consumption will be 195 TJ (150 TJ+400TJ*10%+100TJ*5%). The Global Tracking Framework Report (IEA
and World Bank, 2013) provides more details on the suggested methodology for defining and measuring
renewable energy (Chapter 4, Section 1, page 201-202).
Last updated: 26 June 2018
Disaggregation:
Disaggregation of the data on consumption of renewable energy, e.g. by resource and end-use sector,
could provide insights into other dimensions of the goal, such as affordability and reliability. For solar
energy, it may also be of interest to disaggregate between grid and off-grid capacity.
Regional aggregates:
Aggregates are calculated, whether by region or global, using final energy consumption as weights.
Data Sources
Data on renewable energy consumption are available through national Energy Balances produced by the
International Energy Agency (for around 150 countries) and the United Nations Statistics Division (UNSD)
for all non-OECD countries. The energy balances make it possible to trace all the different sources and
uses of energy at the national level.
Some technical assistance may be needed to improve these statistics, particularly in the case of
renewable energy sources. Specialized industry surveys (e.g. on bioenergy use) or household surveys (in
combination with the measurement of other indicators) would be feasible approaches to filling in data
gaps (e.g. for use of firewood, off-grid solar energy).
Data Availability
Description:
Between the various existing data sources, primarily the IEA Energy Balances and the UN Energy Statistics
Database, annual total and renewable energy consumption for every country and area can be collected.
The Sustainable Energy for All Global Tracking Framework is reporting this indicator at a global level
between 2010 and 2030.
Time series:
1990-present
Calendar
Data collection:
Data is collected on an annual basis.
Data release:
The IEA Energy Balances are updated early Fall (publishing information for the previous calendar year).
The UN energy balances are updated early Spring (publishing information for two calendar years back).
Last updated: 26 June 2018
Data providers
National statistical offices
Data compilers
Name:
The International Energy Agency (IEA) and the United Nations Statistics Division (UNSD)
Description:
The IEA and UNSD are the primary compilers of national energy statistics and develop internationally
comparable energy balances based on internationally agreed methodologies. Aggregates are based on
World Bank analysis of IEA and UNSD data.
References
URL:
iea.org; unstats.un.org
References:
IEA Energy Balances and Statistics
http://www.iea.org/statistics/
UN Energy Statistics Database http://unstats.un.org/unsd/energy/edbase.htm
IEA SDG 7 webpage: http://www.iea.org/sdg
International Recommendations on Energy Statistics (IRES) https://unstats.un.org/unsd/energy/ires/
International Energy Agency (IEA) and the World Bank. 2017. “Global Tracking Framework 2017—
Progress toward Sustainable Energy”. World Bank, Washington, DC. License: Creative Commons
Attribution CC BY 3.0 IGO
International Energy Agency (IEA) and the World Bank. 2015. “Global Tracking Framework 2015—
Progress Toward Sustainable Energy”, World Bank, Washington, DC. Doi: 10.1596/978-1-4648 -0690-2
License: Creative Commons Attribution CC BY 3.0 IGO
International Energy Agency (IEA) and the World Bank. 2013. “Global Tracking Framework 2013”
IRENA Renewable Energy Database
http://resourceirena.irena.org/gateway/dashboard.