Last update: 16 March 2018
Goal 7: Ensure access to affordable, reliable, sustainable and modern energy for all
Target 7.3: By 2030, double the global rate of improvement in energy efficiency
Indicator 7.3.1: Energy intensity measured in terms of primary energy and GDP
Institutional information
Organization(s):
International Energy Agency (IEA)
United Nations Statistics Division (UNSD)
United Nations' Inter-agency Mechanism on Energy (UN Energy)
Concepts and definitions
Definition:
Energy intensity is defined as the energy supplied to the economy pet unit value of economic output.
Rationale:
Energy intensity is an indication of how much energy is used to produce one unit of economic output. It is
a proxy of the efficiency with which an economy is able to use energy to produce economic output. A
lower ratio indicates that less energy is used to produce one unit of output.
Concepts:
Total energy supply, as defined by the International Recommendations for Energy Statistics (IRES), as
made up of production plus net imports minus international marine and aviation bunkers plus-stock
changes. Gross Domestic Product (GDP) is the measure of economic output. For international comparison
purposes, GDP is measured in constant terms at purchasing power parity
Comments and limitations:
Energy intensity is only an imperfect proxy for energy efficiency. It can be affected by a number of
factors, such as climate, structure of the economy, nature of economic activities etc. that are not
necessarily linked to pure efficiency.
Methodology
Computation Method:
This indicator is based on the development of comprehensive energy statistics across supply and demand
for all energy sources – statistics used to produce a national energy balance. Internationally agreed
methodologies for energy statistics are described in the “International Recommendations for Energy
Statistics” (IRES), adopted by the UN Statistical Commission, available at:
https://unstats.un.org/unsd/energy/ires/.
Once a national energy balance is developed, the indicator can be obtained by dividing total energy
supply over GDP. 
Last update: 16 March 2018
Disaggregation:
Disaggregation of energy intensity, e.g. by sector, could provide further insights into progress towards
energy efficiency. At present it is only feasible to calculate such sector disaggregations for the following
sectors – industry, residential, transport, agriculture, households – as reported in the Global Tracking
Framework. It would be desirable, over time, to develop more refined sectoral level energy intensity
indicators that make it possible to look at energy intensity by industry (e.g. cement, steel) or by type of
vehicle (e.g. cars, trucks), for example. Doing so will not be possible without statistical collaboration with
the relevant energy consuming sectors.
Decomposition analysis of energy intensity trends seeks to filter out factors that affect energy demand,
such as economy wide scale and structure shifts, from more narrowly defined energy intensity shifts. The
methodology applies decomposition analysis to isolate a more refined measure of energy intensity, one
that sifts out the temporal shift of relative sector weights. This analysis is also reported in the Global
Tracking Framework.
Regional aggregates:
Aggregates are calculated, whether by region or global, using total energy supply as weights.
Data Sources
Total energy supply is typically calculated in the making of national energy balances. Energy balances are
available for around 150economies from the International Energy Agency (IEA) and for all non-OECD
countries in the world from the United Nations Statistics Division (UNSD).
Data Availability
Description:
IEA and UN energy balances combined provide total energy supply data for all countries on an annual
basis. GDP data is available for all countries on an annual basis.
Time series:
1990-present
Calendar
Data collection:
Data is collected on an annual basis.
Data release:
The IEA Energy Balances are updated early Fall (publishing information for two calendar years prior). The
UN energy balances are made available towards the end of the calendar year (publishing information for
two calendar years prior)
Data providers 
Last update: 16 March 2018
National statistical offices
Data compilers
The International Energy Agency (IEA) and the United Nations Statistics Division (UNSD) Description:
The IEA and UNSD are the primary compilers of national energy statistics and are develop internationally
comparable energy balances based on internationally agreed methodologies. Aggregates are based on
World Bank analysis of IEA and UNSD data.
References
URL:
iea.org; unstats.un.org
References:
IEA Energy Balances and Statistics
http://www.iea.org/statistics/
UN Energy Statistics Database http://unstats.un.org/unsd/energy/edbase.htm
IEA SDG 7 webpage: http://www.iea.org/sdg
International Recommendations on Energy Statistics (IRES) https://unstats.un.org/unsd/energy/ires/
International Energy Agency (IEA) and the World Bank. 2017. “Global Tracking Framework 2017—
Progress toward Sustainable Energy”. World Bank, Washington, DC. License: Creative Commons
Attribution CC BY 3.0 IGO
International Energy Agency (IEA) and the World Bank. 2015. “Global Tracking Framework 2015—
Progress Toward Sustainable Energy”, World Bank, Washington, DC. Doi: 10.1596/978-1-4648 -0690-2
License: Creative Commons Attribution CC BY 3.0 IGO
International Energy Agency (IEA) and the World Bank. 2013. “Global Tracking Framework 2013”